From Philharmonic Hall in Lincoln Center,
home of the world's greatest musical
events --- another program of NEW YORK
PHILHARMONIC YOUNG PEOPLE'S CONCERTS
under the musical direction of Leonard
Bernstein.
This special program is being brought to
you by Polaroid Corporation.
And here is Mr. Bernstein."
My dear young friends: Have you heard the
news?
Johann Sebastian Bach has made the cover
of TIME magazine! Yes,
right
up there along with Presidents,
astronauts and Joe Namath - imagine, Bach,
old Bach, over 200 years dead! And
why? Because they have found out that
Bach is in - in with old and young, rebels
and hippies, bookworms and dropouts,
SKIPPED
Europeans and Americans, concert-givers and concert-goers and even concert-haters.
Everyone who likes music suddenly likes
Bach, And you know what? Time Magazine is right; only there's nothing so new
about it as to warrant a news-magazine cover story, Bach is always being discovered
and dropped and rediscovered. It's an old
story.
SKIPPED
For instance: when Bach died in 1750 he was known and honored in some parts of Germany as a fine organist, a splendid court-and-church-composer, and a good teacher. But there was nothing like a golden halo around his name. Not yet.
His own sons were already composing the music of
a new generation, and they thought of
their old man as a sort of square.
"The Old Wig", they called him.
They had had it with the fugues and cantatas.
And then, 79 years later, after the
SKIPPED
reign of Classicism, after Mozart, Haydn and Beethoven had almost obliterated Bach from musical memory, a conductor-composer named Mendelssohn trotted out the Old Wig, revived his works and his spirit, and Bach was rediscovered. That was l40 years ago.
Then once again he was swamped by the new stormy waves of Romanticism; he got buried again under his wig, and was again regarded as the Old Man of the Fugue. Whatever popularity he had in the 19th century was mainly due to flashy piano transcriptions of some of his organ and harpsichord pieces by virtuoso performers like Liszt, or to sugary performances of a few sacred works like the St. Matthew Passion. Again, Bach's light was dim. Then, in our own century, there was a new flare-up of interest - but this time the error was in the direction of purism, of being too rigidly faithful, too pedantic. And you can imagine that this didn't exactly bring people thronging to the concert-halls.
Now in the 1960's we have a brand new rediscovery of Bach -
through a host of new gimmicks
and treatments and tricks that can be
played on him. His music just
naturally seems to lend itself to
treatments - or transmogrifications,
whether by the boppy Swingle
Singers,
or Rock and Roll
groups, or by way-out composers, or
by very serious conductors. And this is
what our program is about today; Bach
switched on, turned on, rocked, rolled,
shaken and baked. What you're going
to hear may astonish some of you, and
outrage others - but it can't fail to
fascinate you. And the most fascinating
thing of all is likely to be the
incredible strength and joy and spiritual vitality of the
original, the Old Mans wiggy music -those
magic notes that will last forever.
OK - let's start by taking a
famous Bach fugue - the so-called "little" G-
minor fugue for organ. We're going to
hear it in three ways: first in
its pure original form, on the organ, and then in
two transmogrifications -
one a version for symphony orchestra, and
the other a rather more kooky version
for the much discussed new Moog synthesizer.
But more about that later; let's first
listen to the fugue itself, as Bach
conceived it, played by a marvelous young
organist that we discovered at one of
our auditions, the _______ year old Michael
Korn.
Bravo! That's a fugue you can
hear once and never forget. But you're
going to hear it three times, in three different ways,
so you can be sure you'11 never forget it. Now
for the second version:
SKIPPED
you remember I said that Bach was famous in the 19th century through those flashy transcriptions for flashy pianists? Well this method of "selling" Bach continued right into the 20th century in the form of flashy transcriptions for orchestras.
These were usually made by conductors who were not
satisfied with the small number of
pieces Bach wrote for orchestra, to say
nothing of the smallness of the
orchestras he wrote for. Here were
these virtuoso conductors with hundred-
piece symphony orchestras, and no Bach
for them to play. So, these conductors
reasoned, let's give them some,
by making big, lavish transcriptions - and
these were usually justified by the
reasoning that if Bach were alive today,
with these great, overwhelming orchestra-
machines at his disposal, he would
certainly have given his music the same
full treatment. I'm not completely sold
on this argument, but many other
conductors are, most notably the great
and beloved Maestro Stokowski. He has
made many Bach transcriptions over the
years and many concert devotees of Stokowski have thought of Bach only in terms of these glamorous transcriptions. One of the most famous ones is of
this very G-minor fugue we just heard,
and so here it is again, switched on in the grand
Stokowski manner. Of course, ideally, a
Stokowski transcription should be
conducted by Stokowski himself, and
we have been lucky enough to
persuade the great Maestro to come and
conduct it for us.
How's that for a bonus? We are proud
to welcome none other than Leopold
Stokowski.
Thank you Maestro. And what a glorious
noise that was.
But is it Bach? Yes, of course: all the notes are Bach's notes.
But -uh- is it Bach? Of course not; Bach1s notes weren't written for oboes and trumpets and drums and things . Now there's an argument you can keep running for hours at some boring dinner-party.
But if you are on the side of the purists,
and you think that's a distortion of
Bach, wait 'til you hear the next one -
a transmogrification of the
same fugue on the much talked -
and written-about Moog Synthesizer.
*There has been so much
publicity about this fascinating
electronic instrument that I feel I don't even have to take time
to describe it to you.*
It is now world-famous through its
shenanigans on a
record-album called Switched-On Bach,
in which it is manipulated by its most
famous interpreter, Walter Carlos, who is here today to manipulate it for us in person.
We are happy to welcome ourswitched-on guest artist, Walter Carlos
Well, I think we've just about had that fugue.
Let's clear the air
by going to
another famous Bach piece, this
time for
unaccompanied violin solo -that is, in
Bach's original version. After which
you're going to hear a
transmogrification of it that may make
your hair stand on end. But first let's
hear at least some of the original - the
opening movement, or
Praeludium, of Bach's E-major Partita
played by our own concertmaster,
David Nadien.
I hate to stop that beautiful playing, but
that's enough to
give you some idea of
the piece, which goes on in much the same
way for four minutes.
Now: along
comes one of our best-known and most
talented composers, Lukas Foss, who for
some years has been experimenting with
various new wrinkles in the world of the
so-called avant-garde, the way-out
fringes of contemporary music. Mr. Foss,
who is also a conductor, has taken this
well-loved and world-famous bit of
violin music, and has made - not a
transcription at all in the Stokowski manner
- but a whole new piece of his own,
in which, astonishingly enough, every note
comes from the Bach piece. But the way he
puts these notes together is something
else, as you'11 hear in a moment. Foss
calls his piece Phorion - a Greek word
meaning "stolen goods" - thereby emphasizing
the fact that all the notes he uses are
stolen - or rather, borrowed - from Bach.
But he has subjected, these notes to a highly
unusual treatment, which I'11 try to
explain - and that's no easy job.
First of all, each member of the orchestra has
two sets of music in front of him: one a
sheet containing Bach's original, and the
other a complicated set of instructions.
These instructions describe a series of
musical events, the length of each event
being more or less up to the whim
of the conductor. Also left to the
conductor's whim are the entrances and
exits of the various instrumental groups
in the orchestra - with this one extra special
added attraction that whenever a group
of instruments is cued out by the
conductor, they don't stop playing, but
continue with their Bach notes, only
inaudibly, without being heard. Now that may
sound impossible, but it's exactly so.
For instance, the cellos may be playing along
when suddenly the conductor gives them the stop sign
and they continue to finger the notes, but not to bow them,
thus producing no sound except the tiny
tapping of their fingers on the strings.
Listen. Meanwhile another group
is cued in, such as clarinets
They are cued out and the cellos
cued back in, blooming suddenly into
sound at whatever point they may have
reached in their inaudible music:
like this
It's a wild idea, but an exciting one, especially when the
whole orchestra is doing it together,
creating waves of sound rather like
ocean waves rolling in unpredictably
from any and all directions. But there's
much more to this Phorion than that
trick; there are so-called supporting
instruments, mostly brass and winds, that
pick up occasional bits of the string
music and join in, sometimes
imitating them, sometimes mocking them.
Then there are three electric
instruments - guitar, piano and
organ - who have their own separate
instructions.
And then there are different
percussion groups placed around the
edges of the stage, cymbals,
gongs, anvils, what-not - who sometimes
support the instruments in front of them,
and at other times join in a battle with
them, making random sounds of knocking,
whipping, hammering or breaking. In fact,
the first sound you'11 hear, on the
opening downbeat, includes the smashing
of a Coca-Cola bottle in a burlap bag. And by
the end of the piece, with everyone going
at once for all they're worth, Bach has
been turned into a bloody battlefield of
noise. It's certainly not Bach any more, and
I don't even think it winds up being
music in the usual sense, but whatever it
is, it's an intensely personal expression
by a dedicated, talented composer who
adores Bach. So if he
seems to you to be murdering Bach, it may
be really that he is expressing something
about our century that can be expressed
only by committing this kind of violence
on the music of the past. *Phorion
can amaze us and amuse us,
but it can also tell us something
awfully important if we listen with our
minds as well as our ears.*
So far, in our look at transmogrified
Bach,
we've spent much more time on the
transmogrifications-- than on Bach
himself - which is right, since that's what
this program is about. But somewhere
along the way we begin to long for a
bit more of the real thing - more than
a 3-minute organ fugue and a
minute of a solo violin piece. So now,
before our next and final
transmogrification (which may turn out to
be the wildest of all) let's hear a
good solid hunk of untransmogrified Bach-
the opening movement of the Fifth
Brandenburg Concerto in D major, which is
scored for a small string orchestra
with three soloists - violin, flute,
and harpsichord.
Even this performance is
going to be somewhat transmogrified, - that
is, not exactly as it was heard in Bach's
day - since the string instruments are
played very differently now from the way
they were played then, plus the fact that
the piano has replaced the harpsichord
as the standard keyboard instrument.
Besides we're going to shorten it a
bit. The solo parts will be played
by David Nadien (who is certainly earning
his bread today), by our great solo
flautist Julius Baker, and by yours truly at
the keyboard. So let's give our undivided
attention to the glories of Bach's
concerto, before we let the N.Y.
Rock and Roll Ensemble get their hot
hands on it. David! Julie!
Now at last we turn the stage over
to those five mad geniuses who go by the
name of the N.Y. Rock and Roll
Ensemble. They are five hybrids - half blue-
blood and half Beatle, half conservatory-
trained and half trained in the college
of Hard Rock. I'm not quite sure what
they're going to do with this music we
just presented them with the Fifth
Brandenburg Concerto and said: take it
from there. And wherever they take it,
whether you approve or not, one thing is
sure: it's going to be fun. Who knows:
it may even be beautiful.
The Young People's Concerts has been brought to
you by Polaroid Corporation.